Once around Ida and Dactyl.
So, asteroid number 243 Ida was
discovered by Johann Palisa at the
Vienna Observatory, shown in the
pictures there,
in the year of 1884.
It was only 1801 when the first asteroid
Ceres was discovered, so we can see that
the the count was already up to 243 at
this point.
The name comes from the nurse of Zeus,
Ida, from Greek mythology, shown there.
And
a lot of these things are named in a
similar manner
for their association with deities, and
the planets, of course, are no
exception.
Orbits round in the main asteroid belt
between Mars and Jupiter in a relatively
circular orbit, almost flat in the
plane, so an almost sensible, proper
planetary type orbit, three astronomical
units from the sun, taking just under 5
years, 4.84 years. So, if that was a
planet, that would fit into the scheme
perfectly. It's just where you'd expect
there to be one, as of course was the
idea that led to the search for
asteroids in the first place.
Now, 243 Ida shot to fame really because
of the Galileo space mission. The
Galileo spacecraft was launched on the
18th of October, 18, sorry, 1989,
and
was sent out to Jupiter
to orbit around it from 1995 to 2003,
and was aiming to study the planet and
the moons.
It was the first to really uh show the
strongest evidence of some of the
liquid water on Europa and of the
volcanic activity on Io.
It then dived into Jupiter's atmosphere
and
sampled the gases that were present
there before it was destroyed. So,
here's the path that it took to get to
Jupiter. It's quite complicated, so it
was launched from the Earth and then
went on a looping path through the inner
solar system doing flybys of the planet
Venus in 1990,
coming back to Earth and then being
thrown out
to Jupiter,
doing a flyby of Ida on the way at in
1993. It also went past the asteroid
Gaspra in '91 there as well. So, quite
an interesting trajectory as it flew
through the asteroid belt.
Now, this mission was not without its
problems. The Galileo spacecraft main
radio antenna dish should have opened
out like the petals on a flower and
provided the high gain link back to
Earth, but it failed to do so and this
artist's impression on the right here
shows the misshapen result of it
partially unfurling like a damaged
umbrella.
So,
the high gain antenna was out. It didn't
work.
All of the imagery and data and
everything else all had to come back via
the simple pole antenna, which was much
much slower way of transmitting. So, it
took a long time to get the data back to
the Earth from any of Galileo's
observations out in the asteroid belt or
at Jupiter.
But, we got most of them back.
And here are some of the images of Ida
taken revealing its rotation. You can
see the shape and
size of Ida as we approached. We got
closer and closer, better and better
images, and also the changing aspect
between the long thin axis of this sort
of potato-shaped rubble pile asteroid
and the spacecraft. Particularly that
nodule on the top left-hand corner of
the upper image is pointing towards us
in some of the lower images.
So, it revealed that Ida was rotating on
its axis pretty fast actually, just 4.6
hours.
There's a slightly better photograph of
the surface
with some of the craters there.
It showed that Ida is small, 60 by 25 by
19 km
with a mass that comes in at 4.2 * 10 ^
16 kg.
Well, that's a sort of somewhat
meaningless number, but even the
smallest of the s-
Sorry, the largest of the small moons of
Jupiter, Amalthea, has 10 to the 18 kg.
So, this is
uh considerably smaller.
Now, the density based on the mass, and
we could measure the mass based on the
flyby characteristics and how much the
gravity of Ida affected the path of
Galileo.
So, with the mass and the size, we can
work out that it was 2.6 g per cubic
centimeter of material.
Now, that's on the dense side of things.
A lot of these objects are very icy with
a density similar to that of water ice
of around one. Uh and so this suggests
there was a lot lot more rock and
other material mixed in with the ices.
At this distance from the Sun, the Sun's
heating is bringing it up to
a somewhat chilly but not totally uh
uh minimal 200 K. So, a reasonable
temperature still minus 73° C or so.
Here's another photograph which again
shows the lobed nature with the big lump
on the top left-hand end there which
suggests that this was once several
objects that have bound together and
then the gaps have
joined in with uh
dust and infill
uh that have covered over the uh
rubble pile.
And there are quite a number of craters
on the surface there.
Now, looking at it with a spectrograph
revealed that it seems to fit the
description of an S-type object. Uh
many
asteroids and
uh other bodies in the solar system are
classed as S-type, C-type, and so forth
according to their spectra.
And it's quite possible that the
spectrum of Ida is matching the ordinary
chondrites that are the most common
stony meteorites on Earth.
So, that doesn't mean that they
necessarily came from Ida, but it
probably points to Ida and these
meteorites having had a common origin in
a giant collision around 2 billion years
ago. A larger parent object was probably
shattered by an impact sending fragments
including Ida off into orbit and some of
them on collision course with Earth.
And we think that this is true because
we have found something like 6,000
asteroids
in what's called the Koronis
asteroid family
that share an orbit and you can see
there are many asteroids families. The
Vesta and Flora families are very
famous, but
20 or 30 different groups within the
asteroid belt that all seem to cluster
around the same distance and the same
orbital eccentricity, the same degree of
ellipse-like nature, suggesting that
they are the
fragments resulting from some
catastrophic impact in the past.
Um, and it seems that this is really the
story of the asteroid belt.
So, the Koronis asteroids, some 6,000
objects in total,
uh, we've got number 158 Koronis, 208
Lacrimosa, and 243 Ida, and a dozen or
so others that are larger than 10 km and
many, many smaller ones. As I said,
about 6,000 have been identified,
something like that.
We think that there have been some
further breakups within the group. So,
the Koronis family came into existence 2
billion years ago and much more
recently, uh, more like 5 to 6 million
years ago,
in
just yesterday in astronomical terms,
there have been more breakups creating
subgroups within the family, suggesting
further uh, um
events and possibly explaining some of
the meteorites that we are finding on
uh the surface of the Earth.
Now,
the really interesting thing about Ida
and the reason that I chose this one to
have a look at was because
it has a moon.
And I remember reading Sir Patrick
Moore's books in the '60s and
asking myself the question, could
asteroids have moons? If planets could
have moons, and if
asteroids were a bit like baby planets,
could they have enough gravity to hold
onto a moon? And we didn't know at the
time.
Well, Galileo, the probe,
took the photographs in 1993
and having managed to eventually
download them long after the uh probe
had gone past, so there was no re-aiming
it
uh cuz it was too far distant by the
time we got the data due to that antenna
problem,
uh we spotted
a little tiny object in concert with
uh the asteroid Ida. And this goes now
by the name Dactyl.
The Hubble Space Telescope got in on the
act a year later in 1994 and couldn't
see it. It's that hard to detect because
Dactyl is quite a tricky little object.
It's uh orbit around Ida is
based entirely on the Galileo
photographs, and really we've only got
one data point, and so there are many,
many possible orbits that it could be
uh taking in its path around Ida. And so
it could have been almost anywhere in
the vicinity of Ida when uh Hubble tried
to take a look.
Now, we do have a photograph, and this
is it here. It's a real photograph of
Dactyl,
named for the mythic race of spiritual
healers or smiths and associated with
Rhea, the grandmother of Zeus, and uh
there's the uh
little photograph showing this 1.4 km
diameter space rock. So, it's only
1/20th of the size of its parent, Ida,
and this is presumably why the it seems
to be orbiting around it. Um and
probably
the result of a fragment knocked off Ida
in a collision, but without further
data, it'd be quite difficult to be
certain about that.
Now, Ida was the first
of the asteroids to be found with a
companion, and this was back in
uh you know, the days when uh we really
had no idea.
Nowadays,
we are finding more
multiple asteroid objects, binary
asteroids or asteroids with moons.
As- Ida might have been the first, but
asteroid Hermes that was discovered in
the 1930s and then lost, there's a
separate video about that, once around
the lost asteroid Hermes, you can go and
look for that.
Um that makes an interesting read in how
it was observed and then lost for many,
many years.
And then eventually looked at with
radar, and it revealed that it was a
binary. It was two objects in orbit
around each other. So, we we had
observed an object that was a binary, we
just didn't know it.
And since uh we have had some of our
more modern instruments like the Gaia
space telescope, we've now picked up 350
more binary asteroids. So, I can't
possibly go through all of them, but
I've picked out a few just to go with
the story of Ida. And
this is one of them. This is asteroid
Silvia,
discovered in 1866 by Norman Pogson. He
was the astronomer that in made up the
mathematical rule for the um
magnitudes of stars, uh which we'll talk
about in another video.
Um but asteroid Silvia is named for Rhea
Silvia, which is actually the name of
the large crater on the asteroid Vesta,
coincidentally.
Um and Silvia is a fairly decent-sized
space rock, 270 km across. That's half
the diameter of Vesta, for example.
We think it's irregular and probably
two-lobed, and that's an artist's
impression of it on the right. We just
don't have a photograph yet.
And it too has an asteroid family, the
Silvia asteroid family. So, rather like
the Koronis asteroid family that uh
pertains to asteroid Ida, this one has
its own family.
But the interesting discovery from the
years 2001 and 2004 was that Silvia has
two moons, and these have been chosen
as Romulus and Remus, because they were
the sons of Rhea Silvia. So,
we have uh Romulus and Remus in this
photograph here, 23 km and 10 km,
respectively. Now, the orbits of those
and the observations have allowed us to
pin down the mass of Silvia very
accurately. When you have a body in
orbit round something, the mass of the
thing that is being orbited falls out of
Kepler's laws of planetary motion.
Really quite straightforward calculation
indeed.
So, that's Sylvia.
Here's another one, asteroid 130
Electra, discovered in 1873 by Peters.
Another 200 km sized space rock.
Organic chemistry going on on the
surface, we think. So, very, very
interesting indeed. And this has three
moons. So, we have a quadruple object.
And again, it's
probable that these are fragments that
have been blown off it or that they all
resulted from a previous collision.
Such has been the violence in the
asteroid belt region.
Now, all of these are observed to spin.
And I already mentioned the spin of
asteroid Ida.
And the reason that they spin is
something called the YORP effect.
This
It's the effect of sunlight
heating a rotating irregular shaped
body.
It heats the side nearest the sun, but
that soon rotates away from pointing in
that direction. And then the heat is
re-emitted as infrared radiation
from the warmed areas,
but in a sideways direction because the
spin of the body has taken it
away from the direction of the sun.
And that creates a torque about the
central axis of the object, which can
either slow down a
body that's already rotating in the
other direction or speed one up. And
presumably ones that are being slowed
down eventually stop and then might get
sped up the other way.
But it's probable that this is why Ida
is rotating so fast in under 5 hours,
a very rapid spin.
In the extreme case, this can spin these
objects up faster and faster and faster
to the point where the centrifugal
effect
and and it's not really a centrifugal
force, I know that.
We have a centripetal force pulling into
the center of gravity and we have to
accelerate around
a constantly changing vector towards
that in order to
follow up a circular path around the
center. So as the body spins, the
material is constantly being accelerated
towards the center of mass
and that results in a pseudo force that
can tear the body apart and we we've all
been on a
the swings and roundabouts and felt the
effects of this centrifugal
uh
acceleration.
So
in extremis, the just the heat from the
sun can spin up an asteroid to the point
where it will disintegrate. It doesn't
necessarily require a collision to tear
it apart and that was a very interesting
discovery really that
may explain quite why there are so many
fragmented asteroids around.
Once upon a time, the idea that was
going around was that the moon might
have been formed in this same manner
that the Earth might have been spinning
very rapidly
and [snorts]
a chunk of material had
fractured off, perhaps leaving a hole.
Some people even suggested the Pacific
Ocean might be where the moon had come
from. Uh, but this is this is not right.
It's not believed any longer. But we
have other explanations for the
formation of the moon involving
planetary collisions with uh on object
called Theia.
Uh, that makes so much more sense of all
of the information that we now have. And
the Earth and the moon are just so
massive that the spin rates required to
create this would have been utterly
outrageous. And uh this the Earth never
was spinning at that speed.
Now,
the YORP effect is however real. It's
stronger nearer the sun. If you are
nearer the sun, you get more heat, so
you get more of this infrared radiation
coming off at an angle and creating the
acceleration. Um,
both in a linear sense and in a
rotational sense, spinning the object
up.
It has greater effect on smaller objects
because they have more surface area per
unit volume. If you halve the size of an
object, you get 1/8 of the volume, but
only 1/4 of the surface area. And the
YORP effect relates to surface area, and
the gravity relates to the overall mass,
which is dependent on the volume. So,
the uh smaller an object is, the greater
the YORP effect is compared to its
gravity.
It also depends on the shape. If the
thing is nicely spherical, it doesn't
work. You don't get it an accelerating
rotation of
a spherical object.
Only really works for irregular ones.
And below a certain size, gravity is
unable to overcome the strength of rocks
and pull things into a sphere. So, it's
all the small objects that tend to be
irregular anyway.
And one such object is asteroid 2000 PH5
here.
And these are some radar images of this
150 m object, which is
rotating every 12 minutes and gradually
speeding up. So, this is the YORP effect
in extremis. It's quite possible that
PH5 will speed up to the point of
fragmentation from the centrifugal
effect fairly soon. Um it's all a matter
of just comparing the uh forces. So,
here's a little bit of maths for you.
The centrifugal
force pulling towards the center of an
object um and it the gravitational force
can be compared. And if the centrifugal
force
which uh
it the ends up exceeding the uh
force of gravity, then the object flies
apart. So, FC, the centrifugal force,
and I'm using that word advisedly. I
know it's not a real force, but we'll go
with it anyway. Uh is the kinetic energy
uh
and the acceleration of a body in a
circular orbit. You can see those in the
formula. So, in a circular orbit, the
acceleration is V squared over R, and uh
we can do the numbers.
We can run through the forces,
run through the maths, cancel out the
Ms,
and we get the relationship that shows
that the square of the speed
required for an object to fall apart
part increases with the mass, but
decreases with the radius. So,
it's uh harder to break apart heavier
objects and harder to break apart large
objects.
If we replace the mass with the density,
then we can get to this number.
Here, we can put m equals the density p
times the cube of the radius, the
volume,
and we can uh plug in
to the equation and we find that
the speed required is higher for denser
objects and it's higher for larger
objects of similar density. So,
it all makes perfect sense, really.
So,
it may well be more common than we
thought um and that maybe the reason
that asteroids are getting torn apart in
the inner part of the solar system. The
nearer the Sun you are, the worse it is
going to be. So, maybe this is why there
isn't an inner asteroid belt, uh a
so-called set of vulcanoids
orbiting closer to the Sun than Mercury,
because they would all be
torn apart by the Yarkovsky effect um of
the extreme sunlight.
Uh it doesn't apply to planet-sized
objects because they're too massive and
it doesn't apply to the objects of the
Kuiper Belt because way out beyond
Neptune, sunlight is far too weak to
have any effect.
But, it may be why there is widespread
fragmentation of smaller asteroids as a
star goes into the red giant phase. As
the the temperature goes down, but the
surface area of the star goes up,
increasing the overall radiant power
enormously. Red giants are very bright,
even though they're a little cooler
than ordinary stars. And maybe this
explains why we have so many dust disks
around white dwarf stars, because we are
certainly seeing that there are
an excess number of those. So, it could
be down to the YORP effect.
And then, I just wanted to mention the
DART mission, while we're talking about
binary asteroids and so forth.
And we had a pair of asteroids,
Didymus and its companion Dimorphos.
They're quite small, 750 m and 160 m,
respectively, in orbit around
um and
we sent the DART mission as an asteroid
deflection test. It hit Dimorphos at
14,000 mph,
changed the orbit of the two around each
other by 32 minutes per orbit, and also
altered the whole course of the pair of
them around the Sun. So, we have been
interfering with these things, and it's
so that we can defend planet Earth if an
asteroid ever comes our way. Uh it was a
very good experiment to have carried
out.
So, that's it. That was once around Ida
and Dactyl, and some talk about the
various binary asteroids that we know of
out there in the solar system. I hope
you've enjoyed that one, and we'll call
it a day for now.